Tonight on
The Secret Life of the Brain...
( car horn blaring,
tires screeching )
( crash; siren wailing )
Emotions and the adult brain.
MAN:
Why do we have these emotions?
What are they for?
WOMAN:
There's no empathy or sympathy.
He just can't get that feeling.
WOMAN 2:
Deadness, terror,
distorted time.
I did not want to live.
Tonight, the emotional brain.
Captioning sponsored by WNET
Major funding for
The Secret Life of the Brain
is provided by
the National Science Foundation,
America's investment
in the future.
Funding is also provided by...
At Pfizer, we're spending
nearly $5 billion
looking for the cures
of the future.
We have 12,000 scientists
and health experts
who firmly believe the only
thing incurable is our passion.
The Medtronic Foundation,
on behalf of Medtronic--
providing lifelong solutions
for people with chronic disease.
The Park Foundation,
dedicated to education
and quality television.
The Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions
to your PBS station from:
NARRATOR:
"I wake to sleep,
and take my waking slow.
"I feel my fate
in what I cannot fear.
I learn by going
where I have to go."
"We think by feeling.
"What is there to know?
"I hear my being dance
from ear to ear.
"I wake to sleep,
and take my waking slow.
I learn by going
where I have to go."
The adult brain
crowned by the cerebral cortex.
A wrinkled mass of tissue just a
fraction of a centimeter thick.
Within its furrows
lie our powers
to reason, judge, understand.
But buried beneath
is an unconscious underworld--
a cluster of structures
that drives our appetites,
moods and emotions.
MAN:
For a long time, it was thought
the brain was divided into two.
Emotion was one thing
and thought was something else,
and these were two things
that were interfering
with each other.
But it's now clear
that this division was wrong,
just completely wrong.
( toddler cooing, giggling )
WOMAN:
There's a highly choreographed,
hardwired relationship
between the thinking areas
of the brain
and the feeling areas
of the brain.
One affects the other
at all times.
MAN:
It is not possible to have a
properly working reason system
without having a properly
working emotion system.
What you think, what you create,
the problems you solve,
the way you reason
don't exist in a vacuum.
There is always a backdrop
of emotion and feeling.
We are not thinking machines.
We are feeling machines
that think.
WOMAN:
It's been 23 years
since he suffered the stroke.
It was just horrible.
I just felt like I had
totally lost my best friend.
I wanted to bring him back
to the person that he was
but, you know, in reality
I should have known I couldn't.
The doctor said to me,
"The best thing to do
"is to actually have
a funeral for Marvin,
"the one that you married,
"and accept the Marvin
that you brought home
"as a totally different person,
because he'll never
be the same."
NARRATOR:
At 56, Marvin Bateman
is a shadow of the young husband
and father he once was.
A stroke has left him paralyzed
on one side of his body,
but its most devastating impact
is less visible.
He has been cut off
from his emotions.
I want to see my mommy.
Please, no.
I want to see my...
my mommy again.
I want... I want to see my mom.
MAN ( in movie ):
Put the lotion
in the basket!
( dog barking )
( breathing rapidly )
( screaming hysterically )
So how did that make you feel
when we were watching it?
Well, I mean, it's, um...
I don't know.
It's... it's, well,
it's hard.
I'm trying to think.
It's like...
I... I know you're
looking for a word,
but I can't think
of one right now.
No, that's okay.
NARRATOR:
At the University of Iowa,
researchers are trying
to understand
why Marvin cannot feel
a simple emotion like fear.
A scan shows the stark region
where Marvin's brain has died.
MAN:
The core of the damage
is in areas
that have to do
with creating a feeling.
It's not that he has lost the
ability to produce an emotion.
The losses have more
to do with the ability
to feel the emotions
that he produces.
WOMAN:
Can you remember, like, from
this picture to that picture?
Oh, it's been
a long time.
Well, no, see, we
were still living
in Winthrop there.
Yeah, I know.
And then this is
after I got moved to Warren
and I'd had that
stupid stroke, you know?
Yeah.
NARRATOR:
Emotion: you can see it
on Marvin's face--
a smile, a laugh,
a scowl of frustration.
But what he does not experience
is the awareness of emotion.
Emotions are generated
by structures hidden deep
in the brain.
The tiny, almond-shaped amygdala
is the first to respond
to an emotional event,
triggering a series
of split-second reactions
within the brain's
emotional core.
Waves of nerve impulses
travel down the brain stem,
setting off an instantaneous,
visceral response
throughout the body.
DAMASIO:
A lot of the time, the machinery
that produces the emotion
is operating
without us noticing it at all,
creating changes in posture
and in facial expression,
altering the way the organs
inside the body are working,
preparing the body
for what's needed next,
generating chemical responses
that you will
never know existed,
and all of this is what
constitutes the emotional state.
NARRATOR:
For most people,
awareness of a feeling
follows just milliseconds
after an emotion is created.
The body sends signals back
to the area
of the brain responsible
for conscious thought,
making us aware of our feelings.
It is in this region
of emotional awareness
that Marvin's stroke decimated
hundreds of millions
of brain cells.
Marvin experiences emotion,
his body responds.
But when the physical response
is communicated back
to his thinking brain,
the signal falls into a void.
Marvin can only guess at what he
or others may be feeling.
MARVIN'S WIFE:
When you're married,
there's an emotional connection
between two people.
That connection
is no longer there.
It's like somebody cut that wire
between the two of us.
If I try and talk to him,
you know,
about something
that's bothering me
or... ( sighs )
um... I just need
somebody to listen,
he's just not there for me.
There's no empathy or sympathy.
He just can't get that feeling
and he knows it should come,
but it just won't.
MAN ( on TV ):
This is the Chamonix Valley
in the French Alps.
Avalanche paths
are evident all around.
In the past...
NARRATOR:
Before the stroke, Marvin
was a successful salesman,
selling plumbing supplies
throughout Iowa,
but he hasn't been able
to work in 23 years.
WIFE:
He was very ambitious, driven.
Now he doesn't really want
to make any decisions
as far as anything important,
you know.
I couldn't make decisions
like I thought I should
and I probably wouldn't,
you know,
make a decision
about different things.
I probably would have
screwed stuff up
because if it wasn't
for Arlene,
we wouldn't be
where we're at,
because I didn't make,
you know, proper
business decisions
on, uh, house
and any bills
or anything like that,
because I just wasn't able
to make decisions.
NARRATOR:
Marvin has trouble deciding,
because he has lost
the emotional connection
to his past.
Memories and the emotions
that go with them
guide our every decision.
But for Marvin,
memories are bereft of feeling.
DAMASIO:
All the things
that you go through in your life
in terms of decisions
are inevitably accompanied
by some kind of emotion,
positive or negative.
Each decision has some kind
of similarity
with a decision of the past.
And when you are in a position
to decide once again,
you will call up
an emotional memory
that will appear
as a gut feeling
and will lead you
in one direction or another.
So what you have
is literally a navigational aid,
something that helps you get
to the right decision.
And if that is broken down,
then you're at the mercy
of facts and logic
and that's just not good enough.
NARRATOR:
Marvin is rudderless as he
navigates through daily life.
But, um, I'm not an invalid.
I'm not, uh, I'm not...
Some days people
probably think I am
but I'm not.
You know, I'm able
to do a lot of things.
I'd give everything up
to have him back emotionally.
We care about each other,
you know,
and I'll always love him,
but I just miss the old Marvin.
DAMASIO:
There's an old idea that emotion
is not at all a good thing,
because it is difficult
to control.
But emotion is extremely useful.
Emotion is not a luxury.
Emotion is part and parcel
of the mechanisms
that allow us to stay alive.
NARRATOR:
Feelings seem intangible,
intensely subjective.
But now, using
new imaging technologies,
scientists have demonstrated
that emotions have a physical
place in the brain.
Anger...
Happiness...
Sadness...
Fear.
Sometimes intense,
often fleeting,
each has a specific
neural circuitry
that has evolved over
millions of years.
Why do we have
these emotional states?
What are they for?
Well, they all serve a purpose.
They're all adaptive.
By having a feeling of emotion,
you have a possibility of taking
into account what happened
and using that for the proper
planning of future actions.
If something caused happiness,
because it was something that
was potentially good for you,
having that feeling is going to
help you organize your planning
around the possibility
of getting some more
of that good thing that you had.
NARRATOR:
Even emotions
that are disturbing,
like anger or fear,
have their purpose.
MAN:
No one's life
is free from stress,
and when those stresses occur
or problems arise,
we have specific emotions
that are part of our repertoire
for a reason,
because they help us solve
those important problems.
Anger, for example,
is a constellation,
a package, of brain responses
that facilitates our ability
to remove obstacles
that are in the way
of important goals.
DAMASIO:
With fear, the essential thing
is to place the organism
out of danger.
So for instance,
an animal can rapidly flee
from the predator, or freeze.
DAVIDSON:
And so the experience of certain
kinds of negative emotions
are absolutely necessary
and appropriate.
Where problems arise
is when an emotion persists
for a much longer duration
of time than it normally would.
( car horn beeps nearby )
MAN:
It was 6:00 A.M.
I was, like every day,
normal day, going to work.
I was stopped in the red light
in the intersection
and as soon as the light
turned green, I started going.
I just heard a horn, and I take
a look at my right side.
The car...
( crashing )
( voice breaking ):
It's all that I can remember.
I thought it was over,
but I'm still so scared.
MAN:
It's 6:00 A.M. on January 24.
You are driving yourself
to work.
You are listening to the radio.
You stop at the intersection
of School Street
and Highland Avenue.
NARRATOR:
It's been a year
since the accident
that broke
Johnny Cortez's arm and leg.
His bones have healed, but he
is still unable to free himself
from tormenting memories
and crippling fear.
At the V.A. Research Center
in Manchester, New Hampshire,
scientists are monitoring
Johnny's level of anxiety.
He is suffering
from post-traumatic
stress disorder, PTSD.
MAN:
One of the diagnostic signs
of PTSD
is that the reminders
of the traumatic event
produce a physical response.
We decided to use
the patient's own memory
of the traumatic event
as a stimulus
so we can measure bodily changes
in the laboratory.
RESEARCHER:
As you're going through
the traffic light,
suddenly you see the light of
a car coming on your right side
about to crash into you.
RESEARCHER:
What we saw while we
were watching Mr. Cortez
remembering that automobile
accident that he went through
was his heart rate going up
much higher than it was
prior to the memory.
It started out around 90
and it wound up above 140.
NARRATOR:
The beating of Johnny's heart
and the sweat on his skin
testify to Johnny's anguish and
provide a window into his brain.
PITMAN:
We think that what's going on in
the mind of the person with PTSD
is not a simple memory.
It's a reexperiencing situation,
it's a reliving.
If they feel as if
they're really back
in their traumatic situation
then their hearts
start to beat faster
and their hands get sweatier,
because
they're preparing to deal
with a very frightening event.
PITMAN ( over intercom ):
The car crashes into you.
Your chest is constricted
and you want to scream.
You hear sirens
and then a female voice
asking you something,
but you can't answer
the question.
The voices around you
are like a dream.
You're confused and feel
the blood rushing to your head.
MAN:
In PTSD, something breaks.
An event occurs
and the body and the brain
cannot accept that it's over,
and so instead of moving
through it, people get stuck.
They're always afraid
that it will come back.
They think that it has come back
when they hear certain sounds
or feel certain things in their
bodies that remind them of it
and it becomes like a cancer
that sits there
inside of your memory,
that dominates how you see the
world and how you see yourself.
CORTEZ:
Most of the nights,
I can't sleep very well.
The bad dreams,
they are terrible,
and, uh, when I get
bad dreams, nightmares,
I don't know how what...
I can't remember what it...
I just woke up when I realize,
I am on the floor crying.
( sighs heavily )
And my wife, trying to calm me,
saying, "It's okay,
Johnny, it's okay."
NARRATOR:
How has fear, a lifesaving,
evolutionary response to danger,
been transformed by
a traumatic accident into PTSD?
At Massachusetts
General Hospital in Boston,
scientists are examining
the fear response,
scanning the brains of people
with and without
post-traumatic stress disorder
as a series
of expressionless faces
are flashed in front of them.
Hidden among the faces
is a single image
that signifies threat,
a face frozen in terror.
In that instant, one part of the
brain, in every test subject,
is highly responsive--
the amygdala.
DAVIDSON:
The amygdala
is a small structure
which cares a lot
about threat and fear.
If there's something that may be
potentially harmful to us,
it is a brain area which
gets activated very quickly
and recruits other areas
of the brain
to try to deal with
this unexpected circumstance.
The amygdala sends outputs
to the body
so that your muscles begin to
tense, hormones are released,
blood pressure goes up,
and all of these are part of the
protective response of the body
designed by evolution
to help you stay alive.
Imagine you're walking down
a path in the woods
and all of a sudden
there's a curved object
that looks like a snake
on the ground.
And you find yourself stopping
with your leg resting
above that object
and you look down and see
that it's simply a stick.
So why did your leg
stop like that?
NARRATOR:
In the normal brain,
the amygdala acts
like an early-warning system,
alerting us to danger.
But the amygdala
does not act on its own.
The frontal cortex,
where we think and reason,
plays a crucial role.
LeDOUX:
There are two parallel routes of
fear processing in your brain.
One will go directly
to the amygdala--
it's a quick-and-dirty pathway--
and trigger
a fear reaction unconsciously.
But then as the information
slowly makes its way
to the cortex,
the cortex perceives
the difference
between the stick and the snake
and says, "It's only a stick."
NARRATOR:
Once the discerning cortex
has determined
that there is no call for panic,
it sends a message
to the amygdala,
quieting the fear response.
But in
post-traumatic stress disorder,
the cortex is held hostage
by a volatile amygdala.
Thinking is hijacked by emotion.
VAN DER KOLK:
People with PTSD
are very sensitively tuned
to pick up threat
and respond
to even very minor stimuli
as if their life were in danger.
All there is
is your fear and your threat
that "My life
has come to an end."
You're trapped.
CORTEZ:
Any single noise
make me jump, make me nervous.
My heart start beating fast.
So I say,
"What's going on with me?"
"An accident that happened
to everybody, to everyone,
"how an accident can change
the life for someone?
Why?"
I can't understand why.
NARRATOR:
Most people suffering from PTSD
are like Johnny,
at the mercy of an overly
sensitive amygdala
and the hormone that gives
that extra burst of energy
to help us fight or take flight
in the face of danger--
adrenaline.
In a moment of terror,
the amygdala sets off
a cascade of reactions.
A wave of nerve impulses
travels down the brain stem
and triggers the release
of adrenaline in the body,
sending a flood of stress
hormones into the brain
that help etch the memory
of the danger
more deeply into
our neural circuitry
so we can avoid it
the next time.
McGAUGH:
An emotionally
arousing experience
releases hormones
which will enable you
to deal with that experience
in the future,
because you'll have
a stronger memory
of that particular set
of circumstances
and you can use that information
to make decisions about
what you do in the future.
NARRATOR:
But people with PTSD
appear to have an overly
sensitive amygdala.
Even a harmless sound
can set it off.
Again and again, the traumatic
moment is involuntarily recalled
and relived, repeatedly
activating the amygdala
and releasing adrenaline,
each time, searing the trauma
deeper into the memory centers
of the brain.
McGAUGH:
Post-traumatic stress disorder
is simply ordinary emotion
and memory gone haywire.
It's gone too far.
It's using
a very adaptive mechanism
for a maladaptive purpose.
NARRATOR:
If PTSD begins
with a jolt of adrenaline,
can blocking
the effect of adrenaline
stop PTSD before it starts?
( sirens wailing )
In the emergency room at
Massachusetts General Hospital,
where Johnny was treated
after his accident,
scientists
have been experimenting
with a new treatment.
If it works, it might spare
traumatized patients
a lifetime of nightmares
and anxiety.
Why not see
if giving a beta-blocker--
a drug which blocks
the action of adrenaline--
why not give that to subjects
who have had
a traumatic experience?
So that even if
they relive the situation,
even if they
have these flashbacks,
they won't have the adrenaline
making too strong a memory.
NARRATOR:
In a carefully controlled study,
traumatized accident victims
were given the beta-blocker drug
as soon as they arrived
in the emergency room
and then four times a day
for two weeks.
The preliminary data suggest
that by interfering
with adrenaline's impact
beta-blockers can stop
the vicious cycle
of post-traumatic stress
disorder in its tracks.
McGAUGH:
If post-traumatic
stress disorder
can be weakened or blocked,
then there is a way
to prevent this disease.
And until now
there has not been one.
So that's pretty big news if it
turns out to work out that way.
There'll always
be the memory there,
but the hope is to prevent that
from becoming so strong
that it takes over the life
of the individual
and becomes
not just a strong memory,
but it becomes a very
significant emotional disorder.
NARRATOR:
Just as fear has turned
against Johnny Cortez,
terrorizing him with
its unrelenting persistence,
other emotions, too,
can go awry.
Anger, desire, sadness
are just as tangible as fear,
and any one of them
can spin out of control
with devastating consequences.
MAN:
Emotion tells us
what's good about our world,
what's bad about our world.
Emotion forms self-concept,
but our whole self-concept
can get away from us.
We can feel hopeless
and worthless.
We can feel
that there's no future for us.
NARRATOR:
Lauren Slater first checked
into a psychiatric hospital
at the age of 14, suffering
from severe depression.
Ten years later,
after having been in and out
of the same hospital,
she was still suffering.
SLATER:
When I was 24 or 25 years old,
my fifth hospitalization
was fairly brief.
They were
at the end of the line with me.
What could they do for this
girl-- now become young woman--
who they'd seen year after year?
And I was discharged
from the hospital,
and I didn't have a place to go.
So I went to this motel.
And I fell asleep.
I was in this half state
between sleep and wake,
and I could see very, very
clearly where my life was going.
I knew that I did not want to
live the way I had been living.
I saw myself clearly;
I saw who I was and what I was
and what I had become.
And I knew I wanted out.
And out meant two things,
one of two things:
it meant somehow
either getting better, changing
or it meant leaving.
And those were both
options for me.
It was at that moment in the
hotel room that I made a choice.
I wanted to try getting up--
that's what
I wanted to try first.
NARRATOR:
Lauren went on living
with depression
grooved in her brain;
not the passing blues
we all can feel,
but a chronic
and confounding disease.
MAN:
We are still struggling
to understand
what goes wrong in the brain
to cause depression.
Because depression
can have profound symptoms.
It can change lives.
It can lead people
to end their lives.
And yet, when we look at the
brain of a depressed person,
we don't see any holes in it,
any obvious lesions.
I mean, it's far different
from any other disorders.
We don't know what causes it,
we don't have a pathology of it
like we do for Alzheimer's
disease or Parkinson's disease.
So all we have
at the present time
is we have a collection
of clinical signs and symptoms.
SLATER:
To feel depressed,
to me, is to feel dead.
It's to feel that all
of the things in your life
that gave you comfort
and meaning,
they are no longer
even familiar.
Deadness, terror,
horror, distorted time;
it's the ultimate isolation.
It's the ultimate wordlessness,
which is why it's so hard
to talk about it.
NARRATOR:
An image captures what words
cannot-- the depressed brain.
No physical damage is apparent,
but to scientists
its signature is clearly visible
in patterns of brain activity.
The prefrontal cortex,
the part of the brain
with which we understand
and engage with our world,
has grown dull and silent.
The emotional core of the brain
is sending
the prefrontal cortex signals,
flooding it with chemicals
carrying emotional messages,
but the prefrontal cortex
can only make
tentative attempts to respond.
MAYBERG:
There should
be a constant interplay
between what we feel
and what we think.
But in the state
of intense depression,
the balance between
emotion and feelings
and thinking and reasoning
becomes... out of whack.
NARRATOR:
Anyone can become depressed,
but chronic,
unrelenting depression
seems to run in families,
passed through the genes
generation to generation,
a vulnerability
that can be heightened
by traumatic experiences
early in life.
SLATER:
Looking at my family history,
you can see that depression
runs through the family tree.
My father has definitely
struggled with depression,
and his mother and his father
suffered as well.
So I know that it's there,
and it goes back.
I also think, though,
that the environment
had a really significant role
in how those genetic tendencies
or inevitabilities
were played out.
There were episodes of violence,
of pretty serious violence,
where there would be punching,
hitting, pulling by the hair.
A lot of cruelty,
a lot of humiliation.
And it was like that
day after day after day.
MAN:
We know that there are critical
periods in childhood
when the brain
is remarkably plastic.
And one of the consequences
of early trauma,
it's very likely
that the brain does not
form the normal connections
that it normally would,
and it's going to have
consequences in adulthood.
NARRATOR:
Most people
who experience depression
did not experience
childhood abuse.
But Charles Nemeroff believes
that physical, sexual,
even emotional abuse
can make the brain abnormally
sensitive to stress
and, later in life,
make some people
more vulnerable to depression.
Scientists have found
that people with depression
often produce too much
of the stress hormone cortisol.
NEMEROFF:
Many conceptualize depression as
the stress response gone awry.
Stress is really an event that
should be very time-limited.
You're exposed to a stressor,
your stress hormone
should be released
and they should
turn off very quickly.
NARRATOR:
But in the brain
of a depressed person,
stress triggers
too much cortisol for too long.
Chronic exposure
to this normal stress hormone
can be toxic to the brain.
HYMAN:
You can think of it
almost as leaving a scar,
as changing the brain--
as making the brain
more vulnerable
to subsequent depressions.
SLATER:
After my experience
in that motel room,
I really worked hard
to pull it together.
I tried to live
without symptoms.
without collapsing.
It was boot camp for a year,
absolute boot camp.
I had charts, lists,
this, this and that,
anything just to get myself
on the right road.
A huge amount of sweat equity
went into that effort,
and it didn't work.
And when it didn't work,
I was ready, really ready,
to throw in the towel.
And it wasn't just a year,
it was those ten years
preceding it.
I was exhausted.
So suicide was a welcoming
thought to me.
People kill themselves
when they are depressed
as a way of trying
to spare themselves
from unremitting
and unrelenting pain.
Suicide is one viable cure
for depression.
That's how
the depressed person sees it.
But there's this tenacious part
of not only me, but all of us--
we want to live.
So I called the psychiatrist
that I had been seeing
and she said to me, "There's
this new drug on the market
"and I think we should try it.
It's called Prozac."
And my response to that was,
"Don't... don't...
I don't want another drug."
And yet when the psychiatrist
offered me a possible way out,
I immediately jumped for it.
And so I tried it.
You know, swallow
a little biochemical missile
and boom-- kaboom--
you're changed.
NEMEROFF:
The brain contains a hundred
billion cells, neurons,
and they make a hundred trillion
connections or synapses.
And each of the neurons
release chemical substances
called neurotransmitters,
and these neurotransmitters are
the legal tender of the brain;
that's how these cells
communicate with each other.
NARRATOR:
As the neurotransmitters flow
through the brain like a river,
sending a steady stream
of information
between the brain's emotional
and thinking regions,
just a few milligrams
of an antidepressant
like Prozac, Zoloft or Paxil
can quickly and radically
affect one of them:
the mood-influencing
chemical, serotonin.
In the synaptic gap
between the neurons,
where serotonin
delivers messages
from one cell to another,
sit a series of molecules
that work like locks on a canal,
regulating the flow
of serotonin,
determining its rise and fall.
In the depressed brain,
serotonin is often at low ebb.
An antidepressant
can plug the entry
to some of the molecular locks,
forcing serotonin levels to rise
in the open spaces
between the cells,
a change that occurs
throughout the brain,
but especially in the brain's
prefrontal cortex.
MAN:
And the fact that it occurs
in the prefrontal cortex
I think is very intriguing,
since this is the very area
that people would have guessed
would be a critical area
in being able
to regulate your mood,
for the brain to be able
to get itself back on track.
NARRATOR:
Higher levels of serotonin
stimulate a cascade of reactions
that bring the brain
back into balance.
Within weeks, the symptoms
of depression mysteriously lift.
What we really want to
understand is that last step,
that last bit,
that change in the wiring,
so that the "I'm no good,"
changes to,
"Maybe things are not so bad."
And that is going to take
an enormous amount of progress
in neuroscience.
But when we understand that,
we're going to understand
very, very important things
about what it means to be human,
how things go wrong
and how things can go right.
WOMAN:
When I first went on Prozac,
for the first, like, six months
they were, like, probably
the best six months of my life.
Suddenly, I could feel:
Um, I could feel pleasure,
I could feel happiness,
I could feel sadness.
It was like this whole range
of... possibilities.
I was walking around stunned.
My senses were very different,
colors were different,
my taste buds were different,
my tongue was different.
This world
was suddenly open to me
that I had never
really explored before.
There are no words to convey
how... unbelievable
that experience was, um...
how much happiness I had.
NARRATOR:
It has been 12 years
since Lauren first found relief
from depression.
Ever since, she has worked
to rebuild her life.
She received a doctorate
in psychology...
married, had a child.
LAUREN:
In my more reductive moments
I tend to think,
"Alter serotonin transmission,
alter the person;
beginning and end of story."
But the story, of course,
always gets more complicated.
MAN:
You really are one, you know,
of the miracle stories here
for this treatment.
LAUREN:
I've been on this now
for 12 years.
You know,
and I always feel like...
you know, my big concern is that
I'm on borrowed time with it.
Um, and I know that...
DOCTOR:
At this point, it's
a borrowed decade.
A borrowed decade,
more than a decade now.
Borrowed decade plus two years,
which is good, but...
I have to say,
I don't know
that I'm a Prozac wonder story,
I mean, because, you know...
Why?
Well, because I started
on ten milligrams
and I'm now, you know,
eight times that,
which is why
I'm suspicious of the drug.
I am very suspicious
of the drug.
But, Lauren,
here's...
Although I also, of course,
am half in love with it.
But I am suspicious of it.
The fact that you've
been on the stuff,
it's been your mainstay,
you've been mostly
free of symptoms,
we've been able to get
you freer of symptoms
when you've become
symptomatic,
is both
a nifty thing
and one that's,
unfortunately,
a little rare
in the treatment
of chronic, severe
depression.
One rarely sees a depression
as severe as yours
which remits as
fully as yours has.
LAUREN:
I thought, "Now I have this drug
and it's great."
I thought I actually
had it licked,
but then it became a much more
complicated relationship.
It became an...
it became an unreliable lover,
one who had the capacity
to, to save me
and yet who could leave me
at any moment utterly stranded.
NARRATOR:
Lauren is not cured
of depression.
Drugs only relieve the symptoms.
And like an infection that
resists an antibiotic,
Lauren's brain periodically
begins to resist
the anti-depressant;
she relapses.
Dosages must be increased,
different drugs must be found.
Patients call it
the "Prozac poop-out."
LAUREN:
My biggest fear
with Prozac poop-out now
is that now that I have a child,
it's no longer just me.
And I'm afraid that I will not
be able function as a parent...
and that that will obviously
have repercussions
for my daughter.
NARRATOR:
Lauren will always
need medication
to help her
get on with her life,
to simply go to work each day.
But now she looks beyond her own
suffering, to helping others.
Um...
I think when I was young
I thought I was just lazy,
and I think everyone else
thought I was just lazy.
But, um...
It's like when you're
at the dentist's office
you get, like, that
lead cape put on you;
when I'm depressed
I feel like I
always have it on.
Now what
you're telling me...
NARRATOR:
Drawing on her own experience
with depression,
Lauren has become
a practicing psychologist,
counseling patients at
a community clinic in Boston.
Like Lauren,
many of them take drugs
to relieve their depression.
LAUREN:
You started off
the therapy session
saying that you have
no resources
outside of your doctors
and your medication,
and you'd be a puddle of sugar
should I and your pscyho-
pharmacologist, I guess,
and the pills themselves
suddenly fly away.
LAUREN:
I think that drug therapy
probably gives a leg up,
um, the ability to become
symptom-free enough
so that you can learn
new ways of behaving.
But I resist in myself
and in other people
being reduced simply to a series
of biochemistry...
or biochemical interactions,
so, in some ways,
I insist on some kind of...
there's got to be some kind
of therapeutic process here
that's not just talking
about our synapses.
You yourself told me
that you built
a support network,
you've come
out of the closet
with your depression,
and that that
really helps.
And these
are all of the...
coping mechanisms
that you have.
The fact is that you have
resources inside of you.
NARRATOR:
For many people,
drugs alone are not enough
to keep depression at bay.
Research has demonstrated
that the most effective way
to treat depression
is with a combination
of drugs and talk therapy.
HYMAN:
Talk therapy works,
because it works on the brain.
Any time we learn something new,
any time we change our mind
about something,
any time we remember something,
we can do that only by changing
the physical structure
of our brain--
by changing, literally,
synaptic connections,
so that we're processing
information differently.
DAVIDSON:
We can think of therapy
as the brain learning a skill
that's not unlike learning
a complex motor skill
or, for example, becoming adept
at a particular sport,
uh, or becoming adept
at a musical instrument
where there
is systematic practice
and that practice leads to a
demonstrable change in behavior.
The anxiety of
getting depression
is almost worse
than the depression.
Yes, and the thing
you need to remember
about that
is that you've always
gotten through it.
Maybe with cuts and scrapes
and serious wounds,
but you've always
gotten through it, so...
LAUREN:
The curiosities and energies
that had always been
rightfully mine
were finally taking their place.
And yet for me,
it was not that simple.
My personality, yes,
had always consisted
of suppressed energies
and curiosities,
but also of depressions,
echoing intensities, drivenness
that tipped into pain.
I missed these things,
or parts of them anyway,
for they were as familiar to me
as dense fog and drizzle,
which has its own sort
of lonely beauty,
as does a desert
or the most mournful of music.
Having lived with chronic
depression, a high pitched panic
and a host of other
psychiatric symptoms
since my earliest years
I had made for myself
an illness identity,
a story of self that
had illness as its main motive,
the explanatory model
on which my being was based.
And now gone:
I had tipped over, stepped over
the border into health.
There was no more depression,
which had felt like the stifling
yet oddly comforting weight
of a woolen blanket,
or anxiety, which lent a certain
fluorescence to things,
or voices,
which had always been there,
sometimes louder,
sometimes softer,
some north star of sound
in the night.
( applause )
NARRATOR:
In the 12 years since
she has left the hospital
that had become a second home,
Lauren has tamed her depression
and learned to live with it.
At times, it can be
a precarious peace,
but one that has allowed her
to write
and become
a critically praised author.
LAUREN:
When I was in the hospital,
there was a mental health worker
who was so smart.
She said to me around
maybe my fourth time in,
"You know, you're just going
to come back here forever,
aren't you?"
And it looked that way;
it looked like that
was going to be my life.
Well, in some ways I feel like
I'm just so damn successful.
( laughs )
But not for the reasons
that you might think,
um, but because I'm out,
and I've stayed out.
( people conversing
indistinctly )
HYMAN:
The adult brain is capable
of the whole panoply
of human thought.
But it's emotion
that is at the very heart
of our thinking lives.
McGAUGH:
Our lives are governed
by emotions
and the interaction of emotions
with our thought processes.
That's... that's who we are.
We are emotional people.
There's no such thing as
a nonemotional moment in life.
NARRATOR:
"We think by feeling.
"What is there to know?
I hear my being dance
from ear to ear."
"I wake to sleep,
and take my waking slow.
I learn by going
where I have to go."
Next time on
The Secret Life of the Brain:
WOMAN:
One weekend,
our daughter was here
and he walked into the kitchen
and he said, "Who are you?"
In its final decades,
the brain is faced
with a new set of challenges.
MAN:
63 years old and can't
tie your own shoes?
Isn't that ridiculous?
But it marshals
surprising powers of renewal.
MAN:
What makes the engine go?
Desire... desire... desire.
Next time, "The Aging Brain."
Take a 3-D animated tour
of the brain
at PBS Online.
Find brain teasers,
take a cognitive test and more
at pbs.org.